lab/appendix/linux.md, before:

# `Linux`

- [What is `Linux`](#what-is-linux)
- [Shell](#shell)
  - [Login shell](#login-shell)
  - [Check what shell is running](#check-what-shell-is-running)
- [`Bash`](#bash)
  - [`Bash` syntax basics](#bash-syntax-basics)
    - [Run a command](#run-a-command)
    - [Pipe the `stdout`](#pipe-the-stdout)
- [Programs](#programs)
  - [`jq`](#jq)
- [Useful commands](#useful-commands)
- [Groups](#groups)
- [Users](#users)
  - [The `root` user](#the-root-user)
  - [Get my current user](#get-my-current-user)
  - [Create a non-root user](#create-a-non-root-user)
- [Permissions](#permissions)
  - [The `sudo` command](#the-sudo-command)
- [Host](#host)
- [Port](#port)
  - [System port](#system-port)
  - [User port](#user-port)
- [Inspect ports](#inspect-ports)
  - [See listening TCP ports](#see-listening-tcp-ports)
  - [Inspect a specific port](#inspect-a-specific-port)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
  - [Service is running but a request fails](#service-is-running-but-a-request-fails)

## What is `Linux`

`Linux` is a family of operating systems commonly used for servers and virtual machines.

## Shell

An operating system shell is a computer program that provides relatively broad and direct access to the system on which it runs.
[[source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shell_(computing))]

### Login shell

<!-- TODO -->

### Check what shell is running

1. [Run using the `VS Code Terminal`](./vs-code.md#run-a-command-using-the-vs-code-terminal):

    ```terminal
    echo "$SHELL"
    ```

## `Bash`

`Bash` (short for "Bourne Again SHell") is an interactive command interpreter and scripting language developed for `Unix`-like operating systems (e.g., [`Linux`](#linux)).
[[source]]

> [!NOTE]
> `Bash` is the default login shell for `Ubuntu`.

### `Bash` syntax basics

#### Run a command

```terminal
<command> <arguments>
```

Example:

```terminal
ls .
```

#### Pipe the `stdout`

```terminal
<command 1> | <command 2>
```

## Programs

### `jq`

Install `jq`.

## Useful commands

These commands run programs:

- `pwd` - show current directory.
- `ls` - list files.
- `cd <dir>` - go to a directory.
- `cat <file>` - print file content.

## Groups

## Users

Servers and VMs usually run multiple users.

### The `root` user

`root` is the administrator user.

### Get my current user

1. [Run using the `VS Code Terminal`](./vs-code.md#run-a-command-using-the-vs-code-terminal):

    ```terminal
    whoami
    ```

### Create a non-root user

`root` is useful for initial setup, but daily work should be done with a regular user.

For `Ubuntu`/Debian systems:

1. Create a new user:

   ```terminal
   sudo adduser <username>
   ```

2. Allow the user to run administrative commands:

   ```terminal
   sudo usermod -aG sudo <username>
   ```

3. Switch to that user:

    ```terminal
    su - <username>
    ```

4. Verify:

    ```terminal
    whoami
    id
    ```

If you plan to log in via `SSH` as that user, copy `authorized_keys` to the new user's home and fix permissions before logging out from `root`.

## Permissions

### The `sudo` command

`sudo` runs a command with elevated permissions.

```terminal
sudo <command>
```

## Host

<!-- TODO -->

## Port

A [*network port*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Port_(computer_networking)) (or simply *port*) is a numbered communication endpoint on a [host](#host).

> [!NOTE]
> `Windows` and `macOS` also have ports.

### System port

The port numbers in the range from 0 to 1023 are the **well-known ports** or **system ports**.
They are used by system processes that provide widely used types of network services.
[[source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_TCP_and_UDP_port_numbers#Well-known_ports)]

### User port

A **user port** (or **registered port**) is a [network port](#port) designated for use with a certain protocol or application.
[[source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Registered_port)]

## Inspect ports

- [See listening TCP ports](#see-listening-tcp-ports)
- [Inspect a specific port](#inspect-a-specific-port)

### See listening TCP ports

```terminal
ss -ltn
```

### Inspect a specific port

```terminal
ss -ltn 'sport = :42000'
```

## Troubleshooting

### Service is running but a request fails

Verify both:

1. The process is listening on the expected port.
2. You are using the correct host and port in your request.

Commit message:

feat(docs): add process and pid sections

lab/appendix/linux.md, after:

# `Linux`

- [What is `Linux`](#what-is-linux)
- [Shell](#shell)
  - [Login shell](#login-shell)
  - [Check what shell is running](#check-what-shell-is-running)
- [`Bash`](#bash)
  - [`Bash` syntax basics](#bash-syntax-basics)
    - [Run a command](#run-a-command)
    - [Pipe the `stdout`](#pipe-the-stdout)
- [Programs](#programs)
  - [`jq`](#jq)
- [Useful commands](#useful-commands)
- [Process](#process)
  - [PID](#pid)
- [Groups](#groups)
- [Users](#users)
  - [The `root` user](#the-root-user)
  - [Get my current user](#get-my-current-user)
  - [Create a non-root user](#create-a-non-root-user)
- [Permissions](#permissions)
  - [The `sudo` command](#the-sudo-command)
- [Host](#host)
- [Port](#port)
  - [System port](#system-port)
  - [User port](#user-port)
- [Inspect ports](#inspect-ports)
  - [See listening TCP ports](#see-listening-tcp-ports)
  - [Inspect a specific port](#inspect-a-specific-port)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
  - [Service is running but a request fails](#service-is-running-but-a-request-fails)

## What is `Linux`

`Linux` is a family of operating systems commonly used for servers and virtual machines.

## Shell

An operating system shell is a computer program that provides relatively broad and direct access to the system on which it runs.
[[source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Shell_(computing))]

### Login shell

<!-- TODO -->

### Check what shell is running

1. [Run using the `VS Code Terminal`](./vs-code.md#run-a-command-using-the-vs-code-terminal):

    ```terminal
    echo "$SHELL"
    ```

## `Bash`

`Bash` (short for "Bourne Again SHell") is an interactive command interpreter and scripting language developed for `Unix`-like operating systems (e.g., [`Linux`](#linux)).
[[source]]

> [!NOTE]
> `Bash` is the default login shell for `Ubuntu`.

### `Bash` syntax basics

#### Run a command

```terminal
<command> <arguments>
```

Example:

```terminal
ls .
```

#### Pipe the `stdout`

```terminal
<command 1> | <command 2>
```

## Programs

### `jq`

Install `jq`.

## Useful commands

These commands run programs:

- `pwd` - show current directory.
- `ls` - list files.
- `cd <dir>` - go to a directory.
- `cat <file>` - print file content.

## Process

In `Linux`, a process is an instance of a running program.

When you execute a program, the [operating system](./operating-system.md) creates a process that contains the program's code, memory space, variables, and system resources. Each process has a unique process ID (PID) and runs independently of other processes.

Processes can be created, managed, and terminated using various Linux commands.

They form the basis of multitasking in the operating system.

### PID

A PID (Process ID) is a unique numerical identifier assigned by the `Linux` operating system to each running process. PIDs help the operating system to track and manage individual processes.

PIDs are used by various system commands to interact with specific processes, such as terminating them, checking their status, or monitoring their resource usage.

PIDs let the operating system handle multitasking.

## Groups

## Users

Servers and VMs usually run multiple users.

### The `root` user

`root` is the administrator user.

### Get my current user

1. [Run using the `VS Code Terminal`](./vs-code.md#run-a-command-using-the-vs-code-terminal):

    ```terminal
    whoami
    ```

### Create a non-root user

`root` is useful for initial setup, but daily work should be done with a regular user.

For `Ubuntu`/Debian systems:

1. Create a new user:

   ```terminal
   sudo adduser <username>
   ```

2. Allow the user to run administrative commands:

   ```terminal
   sudo usermod -aG sudo <username>
   ```

3. Switch to that user:

    ```terminal
    su - <username>
    ```

4. Verify:

    ```terminal
    whoami
    id
    ```

If you plan to log in via `SSH` as that user, copy `authorized_keys` to the new user's home and fix permissions before logging out from `root`.

## Permissions

### The `sudo` command

`sudo` runs a command with elevated permissions.

```terminal
sudo <command>
```

## Host

<!-- TODO -->

## Port

A [*network port*](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Port_(computer_networking)) (or simply *port*) is a numbered communication endpoint on a [host](#host).

> [!NOTE]
> `Windows` and `macOS` also have ports.

### System port

The port numbers in the range from 0 to 1023 are the **well-known ports** or **system ports**.
They are used by system processes that provide widely used types of network services.
[[source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_TCP_and_UDP_port_numbers#Well-known_ports)]

### User port

A **user port** (or **registered port**) is a [network port](#port) designated for use with a certain protocol or application.
[[source](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Registered_port)]

## Inspect ports

- [See listening TCP ports](#see-listening-tcp-ports)
- [Inspect a specific port](#inspect-a-specific-port)

### See listening TCP ports

```terminal
ss -ltn
```

### Inspect a specific port

```terminal
ss -ltn 'sport = :42000'
```

## Troubleshooting

### Service is running but a request fails

Verify both:

1. The process is listening on the expected port.
2. You are using the correct host and port in your request.
